h1. Hi.

* talked a lot about people's views about other people
* tried to find patterns in memory and culture
* also a bit about stereotypes

* stereotypes interesting because:
** why do we use them?
** how do we use them?
-> specific example, my topic: National Stereotypes in Whiskey Advertisement

h1. Whiskey in and of itself

h2. History

* distillation known since 2nd millenium BC, but not alcohol
* earliest distillation of alcohol in 13th century Italy, from wine
* used as medicine in monasteries, against pain
* use spread from Ireland to Scotland in medieval times
* barley instead of grapes because islands lacked grapes
* first written record of Whiskey in 1405: chieftain dead after Christmas meal
* first written record in Scotland: 1494: king orders 500 bottles
* after Henry VIII dissolved monasteries, production was secularized, now produced on farms
* Old Bushmill's Distillery holds license from 1609, oldest distillery in the world
* during prohibition only allowed when prescribed from doctor and bought from licensed pharmacy -> pharmacy chain Walgreens

h2. Production

* "a type of distilled alcoholic beverage made from fermented grain mash"
* different grains are used
* aged in wooden casks
* classified by ingredients used:
** malt whiskey from malted barley (Gerste)
** grain whiskey
* blending and combination leads to different variations: single malt, blended malt, blended, single cask

h2. Etymology

* anglification of Gaelic uisge ("water"), uisce beatha "lively water"
* translated from Roman \emph{aqua vitae}
* Whis*key* in USA, Ireland
* Whis*ky* everywhere else
* Scotch = "Scottish whisky", in Scotland: whisky

h1. Stereotypes

h2. Definition

* Quote (Websters): something conforming to a fixed or general pattern; especially: an often oversimplified or biased mental picture held to characterize the typical individual of a group

h2. Relevance in Cultural Studies

* Quote: Roland Barthes
* why is this relevant?
* cognitive and social functions of stereotyping, here concentrate on cognitive

* most research about st comes from sociology
* social functions of stereotyping
** st's used to understand one's own social group, "people's biased perceptions of their social contexts" (McGarty et al.)
** ingroup vs outgroup, definition, distinction, boundary
** making sense of own social context

* cognitive functions of stereotyping (McGarty et al.):
** efficient sense-making
*** stereotypes = categories of objects or people
*** inside stereotypes high similarity
*** between stereotypes very low/no similarity
** reduce complexity
*** stereotypes make it easier to understand the world: divide into parts
*** accuracy dependent on subject:
**** higher for gender and ethnic groups
**** very low for political and national groups
** apply knowledge from past encounters to new ones
** shared collective group beliefs
*** st's are commonplace, but may vary dramatically

* problems:
** after categorization, new information tends to be overlooked -> st's become less reliable/accurate over time
** oversimplification: overestimating similarity inside the stereotyped group
** self-fulfilling prophecies

h2. Role in Advertisement

* why are they used (Warlop)
** ads have little time, very restrictive/narrow time frame
** quick access to complex images, "simple ways to say something that everybody understands"
** can facilitate communication (shared understanding of the meaning of the communication)
*** efficient sense-making!
** while neither of us has to believe that the stereotype is true
*** that's not the point of a stereotype!
** we DO share the illusion that the stereotypes in such ads might affect other peoples perception of reality
*** shared collective group beliefs!

h1. Video Examples

-> extra sheet

h2. Common characteristics of ads from one country

* Ireland: nature, shore, ingenuity, resilience, music, singing, instruments (violin), roughness, pub, purity of simple
* Scotland: kilts, ingenuity, community, nature, rugby, bagpipes, understatement, manliness
* USA: independence, freedom, quality, purity of simple, rock music, countryside, farming, the heartland

h2. Common characteristics of all ads

* purity, tradition, music, roughness, directness
